Music Visualizer
Intermediate Level
Final Result:
 
Today we’ll make a simple music visualization. I’ll be using the 2.81 version of Blender.
Using the displace modifier and a texture we’ll make a plane dance to the rhythm of the music. We’ll be using the following elements and techniques:
Topics:
1.		video sequencer
2.		add soundtrack
3.		stucci texture
4.		displace modifier
5.		graph editor
6.		bake sound to f-curves
7.		align camera to view
8.		output properties
9.		file format
10.		encoding
11.		render image
12.		render animation






Steps:
1.		Delete the default cube and save the file as Music Visualizer.blend.
Open a new window by dragging down the + sign that appears when you hover your mouse cursor over the upper right corner of the 3D View editor. Set the editor in the new window to Video Sequencer. You can do it in the upper left corner.
 
2.		Download the music.wav file and save it on your computer. Here’s the link : music.wav 
Open the file in the Video Sequencer : Add -> Sound
 
3.		On the green soundtrack you can read that the soundtrack consists of 741 frames (A). Set the end frame in the Timeline editor to the same number (B). 
 
4.		In the 3D View editor add a plane and scale it : S 10
 
5.		Go to edit mode. Subdivide the edges : Edge -> Subdivide. Set the number of cuts to 100.
 
6.		Go to object mode.
Go to the Texture tab and create a new Stucci texture. Set Noise Basis to Cell Noise (A), Pattern to Plastic (B) and Type to Hard.
 
7.		Go to the Modifiers tab and add a Displace modifier. Set Texture to the Stucci texture you just created.
 
8.		Now we are going to animate the strength of the modifier.
First go to the first frame in the Timeline if you’re not there (A). Then keyframe Strength in the Displace modifier by hovering your mouse over it and hitting I on your keyboard (B).
 
9.		Switch the Video Sequencer to Graph editor. Make sure Strength is selected on the left.
 
10.		Now we’re going to bake the sound to F-curves. Go to Key -> Bake Sound to F-Curves and select the audio file music.wav.  
11.		Hit the Bake Sound to F-Curves button. This is what the Graph Editor now looks like:
 
12.		Play the animation to see how the displacement works:
 
13.		Add a material and set its base color to hex E78F2F (A). Go to Rendered shading (B).
 
14.		In the World settings change the color to black.
 
15.		Go to front view. Select the light and position it above the plane (A). Change its type to Point if necessary (B) and set its power to 5000 W (C).
 
16.		Now it’s time to position the camera. Around frame 130 the displacement reaches one of its extremities. Go to that frame and orbit in the 3D View editor until you’re satisfied with what you see. Then align the camera to view (View -> Align View -> Align Active Camera to View.
 
17.		Still at frame 130 make a test render (Render -> Render Image).
 
18.		If you’re satisfied with that, you are ready to render the animation. First some settings:
In the Output Properties select an output folder where your animation will be saved (A). Change File Format to FFmpeg video (B) and under Encoding change Container to MPEG-4 (C). We’re going to add the audio in Blender, not in an external software, so set the Audio Codec to MP3 (D).
 
19.		Save the file and then render the animation (Render -> Render Animation). This will take a while. You can see the progress in the upper left corner.
 


